Document Ariadne's support for Descriptions [initial draft] (#105)
mirumee/ariadne: docs/documenting-schema.rst

.. _documenting-schema:

> Documenting schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documenting the schema
```

Or 

```suggestion
Documenting the GraphQL schema
```

Author: I'm okay with either of these, but I changed this line in response to direct feedback from @rafalp.  So I'd like to get input from him before selecting one of these.

I also still like "Documenting your schema", myself.  🙂

Reviewer 2: `Documenting the schema` is okay.

> Documenting your schema

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Documenting schema
```

=======================

> You can improve the experience of consuming your GraphQL API by documenting the types that it supports.

Reviewer: Consuming? Sounds like we are slowly burning a GraphQL API fire pit.

```suggestion
You can improve the user experience of your GraphQL API by documenting the types that it supports.
```

Author: I stand by my phrasing here.  I think consumers and providers are fairly standard language in the API world.

To add to my defense, I'll note that the Apollo documentation uses almost identical language.

https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/essentials/schema.html#comments

Reviewer: Alright then!

> Keeping your documentation close to the code that supports it is a great way to ensure that it is always accurate and up-to-date. To support this workflow, GraphQL allows programmers to write descriptions directly alongside types in `GraphQL Schema Definition Language syntax <https://facebook.github.io/graphql/June2018/#sec-Descriptions>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keeping your documentation right next to its code is a great way to ensure it will always stay accurate and up-to-date. To support this workflow, GraphQL allows programmers to write descriptions directly alongside types in the `GraphQL Schema Definition Language syntax <https://facebook.github.io/graphql/June2018/#sec-Descriptions>`_.
```

Author: I appreciate the suggestions, @NyanKiyoshi.

I would like to defend the existing paragraph as grammatically correct, though.  It's not clear to me what your suggestions are trying to accomplish, so I'd just as soon keep the current version in this case.

Writing Descriptions
--------------------

> GraphQL Descriptions are declared using a python-like docstring format, and may include Markdown features::

Reviewer: Looks odd.
```suggestion
GraphQL descriptions are declared using a python-like docstring format, and can include Markdown features::
```

Author: I think you're right here.  I'll lower-case "descriptions" throughout the page.

    query = '''
        """
        A simple GraphQL schema which is well described.
        """
        type Query {
            "A list of all users of the service."
            users: [User]!
        }
    '''

    user = '''
        """
        A user is an individual's account.
        """
        type User {
            "Unique ID of the object."
            id: ID!

            "The name the user is identified by in the service."
            username: String!

            "The date this user object was created."
            joinedOn: Datetime!

            "The user's birth data."
            birthDay: Date!
        }
    '''

Introspection
-------------

> GraphQL Descriptions defined this way will become available via a GraphQL introspection query. This will also permit interactive GraphQL API explorers to include your descriptions in their interactive documentation::

Reviewer: - `Permit` is `to grant` to something. We most likely want to say `to allow`.
- Still the capital of `Description` that is visually looking odd, let me know what you think.
```suggestion
GraphQL descriptions defined this way will become available via a GraphQL introspection query. This will also allow interactive GraphQL API explorers to include your descriptions in their interactive documentation::
```

Author: "Permit" and "allow" are synonyms and both seem valid to me, here.  I'd just as soon keep "permit", unless there's a compelling reason not to.

    query IntrospectionQuery {
        __schema {
            types {
                kind
                name
                description
            }
        }
    }

> .. code-block:: json

Reviewer: We probably could add a little comment here.

Author: Yeah?  Maybe something just noting that this is an illustration of the response payload?

There are a few other places in the docs that use this kind of illustration already, so I thought we might be able to get away with it here.  But you're probably right, it wouldn't hurt to add.

https://ariadne.readthedocs.io/en/0.2.0/scalars.html

Reviewer: Yeah, just a little caption.

Reviewer 2: I prefer paragraphs to in-code comments. Speaking from experience the approach of having few laser-focused code bits with well-described text around them produces better docs.

.. _documenting-schema:

Documenting schema
==================

> You can improve the experience of consuming your GraphQL API by documenting the types that it supports.

Reviewer 2: I've been thinking about this section for a while now, and I've reached the conclusion that it should pivot it's attention to the fact in GraphQL API exploration and documentation is part of the standard.

Something along the lines of "One of GraphQL features that improves developer experience is build-in support for schema exploration and documentation generation."  We can then give more info on each of details in next sections.

Author: I took a stab at re-organizing the article to focus on the GraphQL standard and its motives.

I feels to me like it gives a little less opportunity to say: "GraphQL descriptions are a thing.  Ariadne supports them.  Use GraphQL SDL to define them in Ariadne."  I think it might read a little less like documentation for an Ariadne feature and more like a sales pitch for GraphQL?  😅

I kind of liked your previous outline better, but what do you think?

Ariadne recommends writing documentation via the `description feature <https://facebook.github.io/graphql/June2018/#sec-Descriptions>`_ in GraphQL Schema Definition Language.  Keeping your documentation close to the code that supports it is a great way to ensure that it is always accurate and up-to-date.

> Example Description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Descriptions
```

-------------------

> GraphQL descriptions are declared using a docstring format that feels very similar to Python's::

Reviewer 2: How about something alike to:

> GraphQL supports special "description" syntax similar to Python's `docstrings` that enables you to provide additional context and information for developers learning the schema::

Author: I re-worded this section closer to this!

    query = '''
        """
        Search results must always include a summary and a URL for the resource.
        """
        interface SearchResult {
            "A brief summary of the search result."
            summary: String!

            "The URL for the resource the search result is describing."
            url: String!
        }
    '''

> Note that GraphQL descriptions also support Markdown features (as specified in `CommonMark <https://commonmark.org/>`_)::

Reviewer 2: I've didn't know this. 😯

How much of markdown spec is supported? We may want to confirm this with extra tests, or reword this part to something like "You can also use some of Markdown syntax in descriptions, such as text formatting or links.".

    query = '''
        """
        Search results **must** always include a summary and a
        [URL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL) for the resource.
        """
        interface SearchResult {
            # ...
        }
    '''

Browsing documentation
----------------------

The most common way you and your users will encounter GraphQL documentation is via an interactive GraphQL API explorer.

In `GraphQL Playground <https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground>`_ (shipped with Ariadne's startSimpleServer helper), descriptions are available via a documentation browser.

.. image:: _static/graphql-playground-example.jpg
   :alt: GraphQL Playground example

Introspection
-------------

> GraphQL descriptions can also be accessed programatically.  Internally, this is how tools like GraphQL Playground can provide the live, dynamic experience they do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> You can get programatic access to a graphQL server's schema using an `introspection query <https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/>`_.  An introspection query is specified using a special field in the Query type, using standard GraphQL query syntax::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All GraphQL servers implemented with Ariadne support programmatic way to learn about the schema through the special `fields defined on Query type <https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/>`_.

For example, to list all types defined in schema together with their kind, name, and description you can run the following query::
```

    query IntrospectionQuery {
        __schema {
            types {
                kind
                name
                description
            }
        }
    }

> A response to the above query might look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A result of the above query might look like this:
```

.. _documenting-schema:

Documenting a GraphQL schema
============================

The GraphQL specification includes two features that make documentation and schema exploration easy and powerful.  Those features are descriptions and introspection queries.

There is now a rich ecosystem of tools built on top of those features.  Some of which include IDE plugins, code generators and interactive API explorers.

> Interactive API explorers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GraphQL Playground
```

-------------------------

> Ariadne's built-in servers ship with `GraphQL Playground <https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground>`_, a popular interative API explorer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ariadne ships with `GraphQL Playground <https://github.com/prisma/graphql-playground>`_, leading open source API explorer for GraphQL.
```
